# China’s secret weapon in the trade war

The party is turning to the gig economy because it is vast: the state - controlled trade - union federation estimates there are 84m people relying on “new forms of employment”, including delivery services and ride - hailing. The government cites a broader category of 200m “flexible workers”, including the self - employed and part - time workers. Both figures far exceed the 54m jobs at state - owned enterprises in cities, and make up a big chunk of the 734m - strong workforce. One delivery firm, Meituan, uses 7.5m couriers who get paid $11bn a year. Drivers often describe their taxing work as guodu, a transitional job “to ferry over a stream”.

Happily for the party this huge gig economy is growing, despite trade clashes and years of sluggish consumer confidence. Meituan’s workforce, typically employed via third - party contracting firms, is 41% larger than in 2021 (see chart). In March its bosses said they expected healthy growth of both food and shopping delivery. The firm is forecast to increase its sales by about 15% annually until 2027. Similarly, the number of ride - hailing licenses exploded from 2.9m in 2020 to 7.5m in 2024 (see chart).

The pivot began in 2023, when Li Qiang, the prime minister praised the platform companies for their “increasingly prominent” role in demand and employment. Now the government is openly embracing the gig economy as a cushion for the economy.

That embrace is so fulsome that the government is even encouraging gig - economy companies to create what amounts to a shadow welfare system. In February JD.com offered social - security benefits to its drivers. Meituan says that it will “gradually provide” social security for its couriers starting with a pilot scheme in the second quarter of 2025.

What’s not to like? A huge question is who ultimately pays. Pensions and medical insurance sound great to workers, but are not if they come directly or indirectly out of their pay cheques. JD.com insists it will pay both the employer and employee’s premiums into a state - run scheme. Scepticism abounds on social media. Several drivers, when asked about the scheme, use the phrase, “the wool still comes from the sheep’s back”—nothing comes for free.

Even more helpfully for the party, an epic struggle for market share between rival firms means a hiring war is being unleashed amid the trade war. On April 21st JD.com, an e - commerce firm that recently entered the food - delivery business, said it would take on 100,000 new riders by the end of July.